i am here with siddhartha mukherjee
sid thanks for joining me again on the
podcast oh thank you very much thank you
for having me
so you've been here twice before we
spoke about both of your
fantastic tomes the emperor of all
maladies which is
really the definitive book on cancer
in our lifetime just an amazing book
and also the gene which
was also amazing and we we so we've
spoken about both of those books
at length on the podcast i recommend
anyone interested in those broader
topics
consult those previous conversations but
today i just want to um
i want to talk to you about the covet
pandemic
in general and and just get your kind of
expert
eye view of what has been happening here
these long
now five months in the u.s that we've
been
dealing with this i think ineptly by any
objective
criterion you know our ineptitude is
fairly well established here
so um and i'll just i'll remind people
who may not know it you you are
you are a famous oncologist and
also writer but your background is in
virology so
you actually have a wheelhouse that is
relevant to our current concerns
so just to start off here and we can go
anywhere you want to go
sid but what has been your experience
watching this all play out and watching
in particular watching the spread of
misinformation and just the way in which
it's been given
top spin by political cynicism in many
cases and also
just in the beginning there was a fair
amount of
you know actually good faith uncertainty
about
the biology and epidemiology of
covid and so it's it really has been
hard to draw the line
at various points between a valid
contrarian opinion
and a dangerously irresponsible one and
that you know
granted that that line is probably
getting clearer but
what's it been like for you these last
five months watching this
unfold so i think there's several
threads
in that conversation that i want to
break apart because they're quite
different
so i want to make a a very clear
distinction between the uncertainties
of which there are many and the
ineptitudes of which there are many
so we can talk about them separately
because those are important
and there's gray zones in all those
cases
so let's first talk about what went
wrong
and what could have not gone wrong in
the united states and around the world
well before that let's talk a little bit
about why
this particular virus of all viruses has
the capacity to cause a pandemic
and the answer lies in the biology of
the virus
there are two features or three features
of the virus that make it particularly
a pandemic causing virus that
obviously is uh is not true for for many
viruses
one is that it's completely new we have
never encountered it before as far as we
know
and so therefore humans are
immunologically naive to
to the virus that's one the second thing
and now we're getting to really
important things
is the fact that the virus has a high
degree of
high capacity to spread virologists
use one measure of this a measure called
r naught which is the a measure of how
many people one person infects
and obviously mathematically speaking if
that number is above one
then the infection will spread
exponentially so some viruses
have huge numbers measles is a very very
highly
infectious virus cyroscope ii
sits actually in in the in the higher
range
it's hard to estimate exactly what that
number is because it varies
depending on the population and the
behavior of the population but it's got
a high number
and the third feature which is actually
probably the
the one that we realized very late and
perhaps too late in the game
and is the most insidious feature is
that
asymptomatic people people with
absolutely no symptoms
seem to seem to be able to carry the
virus and spread the virus
now that's a big distinction that is not
true for instance for ebola
or other very lethal viruses when you
when you have symptoms you usually
then become trans a transmitter but it's
true for this virus that you
we might be familiar with other viruses
that it's true for hiv also
it's it's true for hiv you can have be
completely asymptomatic
but still transmit the vice you can have
virus in your blood and transmit the
virus
these viruses that have this capacity to
have asymptomatic transmission
are particularly difficult because you
cannot
simply find people by symptoms alone you
have to find them by testing
and and and if you want to contain the
virus using
public health strategies such as
containment or quarantine or isolation
you have to essentially find them you
have to go and find
them they will not find you because they
don't know whether they
whether they by you i mean a medical
doctor or a medical system
and that's because they don't know if
they're carriers asymptomatic carriers
or they're really
having have the virus yeah so so
so that covers the territory of why this
virus of all viruses
has and had the capacity to start a
global pandemic
so this brings us to the next piece of
conversation which is
the conversation about ineptitudes
so very important to remember that the
ineptitudes
started right from day zero in wuhan
china
we should have known about this virus
long before we actually
did as a global community they we
several attempts to buy chinese doctors
in full good faith
to communicate the urgency of what was
going on in china
were essentially blocked we think or we
now know to some extent
and in fact as you very well know the
uh the ophthalmologist who sounded the
alarm
on the virus was essentially censored
and unfortunately
as you also know he died of that viral
infection we'll come back to that
we'll come back to that in a second it's
very important because
that tells us something about the virus
i think so that's where the ineptitude
started
i say i would say that's a global
ineptitude that is also
i mean people have conspiracy theories
around it i don't know
what to believe and what not to believe
because the investigation has not really
proceeded
the chinese government has been
extremely reluctant to share
many crucial pieces of information
around that first
you know those first few days are you
referring to the speculation that this
came
from a a lab as opposed to a wet market
or what conspiracy are you thinking
about
so so many so one is that
i think we still don't know the origin
of the virus i think that
there was an there's an interview in
science magazine from one of the workers
who
cultivates coronavirus in the wuhan
coronavirus facility
and she's adamant that it did not come
from the lab but the
you know the question is that lab has
not been approp you know that incident
has not been fully
investigated i just don't know
i do not think that it was an inten i
don't think it was a bio terror weapon
for instance
nor do i think that that it was a
intentional
infection of someone right but i do
think that we need to investigate and
find out
where the virus came from and perhaps
even track back the very first index
case which is usually possible
if we have access to full free
information which we do not at this
point of time
just to linger there for a second said
does it actually matter
you know within a very short period we
had the full
sequence of the virus and we're now
dealing with
the basics of vaccine design and
treatment design and you know
epidemiology does it really matter
what the origin moment was it matters
for future pandemics
and it matters for future surveillance
one of the things that
you know we have to learn from this and
never let it happen again
and doubtless there are hundreds of
thousands of viruses
xenoviruses that lurk in bats and other
animals
particularly social animals i mean one
question is you know why bats
seem to carry so many viruses it's
because they're you know they're very
social then they live in
very dense populations in in
environments so
so it matters for the next pandemic
because we cannot let this happen again
but moving to the united states the
ineptitudes are the
the the i would say the the glaring
errors
began also very quickly and began from
the start so
one error that began from the start was
that
obviously it was the first response
here was oh it's going to go away it's
not going to come
it's going to go away that's obviously
now not been the case but that was a
completely misplaced response it was not
going to go away
the first index case was seen at the end
of january in seattle
and that should have been the that
should have been an immediate
call for urgent action because
because we knew as i said that this was
a xenovirus it had a rapid spread
and we knew by that time there was
enough suspicion
in the virological community that there
were asymptomatic spreaders it wasn't
definitive but as soon as that suspicion
is raised you need to
start acting on it so we're at the end
of january we're in a small hospital
outside seattle the first index case
walks in
that should have sounded a major alarm
to the cdc
and a major alarm to you know every
health authority
saying there is if the virus has now
entered the united states and
we should do something about it the
second
major i would say glaring error which
should never be repeated
was probably the biggest of them all and
that is
once the virus was in the united states
there was no test for the virus for
about 40 days so there was no fda
approved test for the virus
for 40 full days i cannot emphasize as
an immunologist or a virologist
that that is that that is a
it is inconceivable that that would
happen
but for 40 full days there was no test
for it
and that was partly because the the cdc
tried to make a test
and the test the first batch of the test
worked i interviewed
virtually everyone i could and there's a
big piece that i wrote
in the new yorker about this the cdc
made a test it was actually in the end
it was a good test
but when they expanded the batches of
the test and send it out
sent it out to the public health
services
which is where these tests are usually
then monitored
the test failed to work one probe one of
the
pieces of the test didn't you know kept
showing up with
false positives which meant the entire
test was
was not reliable now in that meantime
in that same period of time so as the
clock is ticking now day one day two day
three
several academic investigators including
folks like alex greninger at the
university of washington who i
interviewed for the peace in new yorker
and i you know have had a long
communication with
alex greninger had by himself in his lab
developed a test for the virus
but that test had to be in order to be
used it had to be licensed by the fda
and the cd and the cdc now the fda and
the cdc you know we have a
we have something which allows such
licensing to proceed very quickly which
is called the emergency use
authorization
eua and if you speak to the fda and the
cdc they
they will tell you that oh god you know
gosh our eua was working fine
we were just waiting for our tests to be
corrected if you ask people in
in the private laboratories they will
say just the opposite they will say
well we applied for the eua but it took
by the time it turned around
you know it was already too late and i
think you
described and i think this was in your
new yorker piece you described
doctors spending nearly a hundred hours
filling out forms to get permission
to test and these forms couldn't even be
emailed right they had to be snail
mailed
to the fda and it just sounds like
the infrastructure over there is a
generation old
so the i spoke with the fda and i spoke
with the cdc
the fda says that it was a parallel
infrastructure that you had to do a
snail mail but they would also accept
emails
that's what the fda says and it also
says that and it maintains that they
were processing these as fast as they
could
the in laboratory investigators say that
that's not the case
that in fact the snail mail slowed them
down
one problem of course you have to
realize that there was an intrinsic
problem
at this point of time which is that no
one had samples so in order to validate
a test
you need samples to validate a test but
if you have only it's it's a
it's a perfectly circular argument so in
other words
if you don't have a test that works you
don't know who to validate it on
because you don't know who's infected
and how can you prove that a test works
if you don't have
samples to validate it on do you see
what i mean yeah so it's a it's a
perfectly
in i mean we really need to learn about
these pieces of logic
or these you know these sort of failures
some of which are
i would say some of which are
intentional some which are
non-intentional but it's
this is a perfect example and it could
be applied into any business it could be
applied to any medicine
if you if if asymptomatic individuals
can carry the virus which happens to be
in this case
then how do you get you know 20 people
what's what's the
what is the was it a pos what does a how
do you test whether the test works or
not
you can't because you don't have samples
to test on anyway in any case
by you know 15 20 days in greninja and
others had scrambled together
enough material from various sources to
be able to test
to show that their test worked and
eventually
of course the fda cdc test also began to
work there
there was a faulty reagent that was
corrected but by all of this time
you know 40-yard days had passed 30-yard
days had passed
for the most part i mean of course there
was testing going on as well
but about and that's a critical period
of time because that is when the
infection was spreading
and we don't even know what happened in
those 30 to 40 days
we don't know how many people flew from
seattle
to for instance new york and new jersey
we don't know how many people came in
from there was no travel ban remember on
europe
so that is mistake number two so we just
we just went through mistake number one
which was the absence of testing mistake
number two was to dismiss the idea
or was to say this is a chinese problem
this is a problem that is in china
and not recognize the fact that the
slopes of
infection rates were climbing rapidly in
europe
in italy and spain so during the time
that we had no test
there was a rap there were people coming
in and going out of major cities new
york being probably the major epicenter
and there are several genetic clues that
clearly suggest
that the that the infection in new york
at least was primarily seeded by
european travel
and not by not travel from asia right
the infection in europe was seeded in
turn
from from asian travelers who came into
italy and spain
but the infection in the in new york we
have genetic evidence to suggest
that it was from people who came in from
europe so
not putting in a travel ban testing bank
or even a quarantine in isolation
during that period of time when we
didn't have tests is a crucial error and
and that was error too i should say that
just backtracking a little bit i should
add that the
the fda and the cdc have had a long
history
of working with of working with
public health laboratories but they have
had actually not a very long history of
working with
private academic laboratories so like
the university of washington
or like columbia university etc so
that is in some ways error number three
because if the fda had had a
well-established track of or a
if they had vetted and pre-authorized
as countries like south korea and other
places did some
academic laboratories as being good
enough or of high enough caliber
that if they were to apply for a test a
successful test
that the fda would say okay ours doesn't
seem to be working we'll take yours
until ours gets to work
that infrastructure was present in the
within the fda but present in a very
infant form that's what
the academic laboratory folks told me so
academic pathologists told me
the fda says that's not true and so the
question is when we perform the autopsy
one of these
one of these two things is correct we
don't know which one it is
either the fda has had a a long
tradition
and it's quite smooth and and
streamlined their capacity to work with
academic laboratories pathology
laboratories like greninjas and
colombia's
and and new york uh hospitals or it is
in fact was not
streamlined and had to be streamlined in
a kind of
emergency setting so so now we keep
moving the clock keeps ticking forward
so now we have people from europe
traveling into the united states
carrying virus symptomatic asymptomatic
we don't know
there is nothing going on in the borders
except for originally as you very well
know a ban against
chinese travel but of course that was
not that was not where the leak came
from
and they're coming into new york and
they are spreading the virus
asymptomatically because there's and we
don't even know
where they're going what they're doing
where they're spreading the virus and we
don't even know how many
because the test is still lacking so
move the clock forward a little bit
forward again actually actually before
we
advance i'm wondering let's just linger
on
on the testing piece for a second so
what ensures
that we learn the right lessons here it
seems to me that some lessons
seem genuinely hard to learn because in
normal times
you would view this this sluggishness
from the fda
and the cdc as a feature not a bug in
that i mean we obviously
it's got to be motivated to some degree
by wanting to ensure
quality control you can you don't want
to just approve
labs all over the place to get their
competing tests to scale
and i got to think the status quo was
motivated to some degree
by an awareness that there's a trade-off
between
safety and speed in situations so
so you're absolutely correct i mean you
know we the last thing we want is a
is a trigger happy fda or a trigger
happy cdc
so that we we certainly don't want that
but what we do want
is a cdc and the fda and an fda that is
able to respond
to pandemic situations in a different
way that it just standard response to
the approval of any drug
or test in normal circumstances so there
has to be
some kind of hysteresis or some kind of
space as it were a dial dial up dial
down system
in which you know you can dial up or
dial down the responsiveness
based on the situation one way that i've
proposed
in the new yorker piece and subsequent
pieces i'm on several
several panels that have to do with code
response and what we learned from the
code response
but one way is to do exactly what i told
you which is
to do some kind of pre-authorization so
that the fda would have actually rather
than
waiting to receive applications in the
setting where their own test was not
working to go and seek out
people that they have already vetted
right and ask them
you know can you help us figure out a at
least an interim test
we will validate that test and at least
launch that while we wait for our test
to come working so that would be
that would have been one kind of
solution and this pre-authorization
process or pre-vetting process
could be quite stringent you know you
don't you know you the fda has lots of
time
in between pandemics to ensure that you
know the university of washington is not
just
you know out to make a fast buck and
that their you know their pcr machines
and their
this is their you know what their
capabilities are how many tests can they
do per day how many
what is the reliability of their testing
infrastructure can they report out those
tests et cetera et cetera
so that rather than waiting and and
being being passive
the fda would have been or the cdc and
the fda would have been active
during this process so that's one thing
that one can learn you don't want to
trigger happy fda
but you do want an fda that is prepared
to what i would call dial up and dial
down
in the circumstances of a pandemic
yeah yeah okay so take me to the border
we now have people
pouring in from europe many under
the increased load precipitated by the
sudden announcement that if you don't
get in in the next
15 hours or whatever it was you're not
getting in so we just had people
flooding the airports of europe trying
to catch the next plane out
obviously breathing heavily on one
another all the while
how do you perceive that moment so
so we're we're then now in a situation
where as i said in new york city
we don't have testing we don't know
what's happening here
and what is happening in europe is just
the opposite so what is happening in
europe is that everyone is reacting to
the situation in europe and they are
getting on planes
and jumping on planes and and
essentially coming as soon as they can
they're arriving into new york city and
new york city
very very soon is full of
people from europe who are trying to
catch the next flight back and we have
no quarantine for them we have no
isolation for them we have no contact
racing for them
and there is no way to know how long
they
will stay whether they are tourists
whether they are locals returning back
it's just mayhem so that's that brings
us
you know the clock now chicks and we are
now back in we are now
sort of 60 days 50 to 60 days and we're
beginning to see
the uptick in new york infection rates
by now so clearly this is a signal
that's a problem there's a
you know there's a surge or the
beginning of the surge
and that's usually when a usually when
we start to do things like
quarantining and now things
you know isolation contact tracing and
masking becomes
important so at this stage what's
important is to have
one clear consistent message saying
we're just beginning to test
we don't know if people have been
quarantined or not we don't know if
people have been isolated or not we're
just beginning to test
but the first thing you should do is
start social distancing
you know avoid crowded situations etc
but but most importantly we don't know
and we'll come back to this point in a
second sam
we don't know if masks work or not
but they have historically worked
against other respiratory viruses
so if you're symptomatic wear a mask
and particularly if you're a front line
healthcare worker
wear a mask and wear probably wear full
ppe because that's what we learned from
the from the chinese that it's a
highly contagious virus and essentially
the cdc vacillates on masks first it
says nope
not required and we've spent a lot of
time
i said it was even worse than that i i
don't know if this was the cdc
or the world health organization or both
but someone at that point
i think clearly concerned that there was
going to be a
a you know a run on ppe and therefore
not enough for frontline workers there
was messaging around
masks not only maybe not working but
being counterproductive that you'd be
more likely to be
touching your face you're more likely to
get sick perhaps by wearing a mask so
people were
actively discouraged at one point from
wearing masks
that's exactly right and the surgeon
general at that point of time also said
that masks were not required
and the the logic that i
i've heard is that it's it was because
you know
people were saying that it wouldn't you
know that there wasn't that there'd be a
run on ppe
personal protective equipment then that
doctors would be
would therefore not be able to get get
any but that doesn't that obviously
the public to the public that makes no
sense how can you how can how can it
how can it work for doctors but not work
for you it just just doesn't make
it doesn't it just just doesn't make any
sense and so
so we then go through this moment in
which we don't know if masks work or not
and you can't test it experimentally
right you can't give people coronavirus
and say you know either half wear masks
or
half don't wear masks and and see and
remember masks work both ways
based on a whole bunch of experience
with respiratory viruses
they protect a spreader from spreading
and they protect an uninfected person
from getting virus from getting the
virus so
so we don't know and we're in this kind
of limbo
around masking and so
what's happening in the hospitals
meanwhile is just really terrifying in
new york hospitals because
they also don't have enough protective
gear so they don't have enough n95 masks
the kind of mask
that really is fitted and you know lets
through only
a very small fraction of of respiratory
particles
these are not that heavy duties you know
they're not
they're not that fancy they cost less
than a dollar typically
but hospitals are running out of masks
and the
emergency rooms and the hospitals are
becoming progressively crowded
with people who have symptoms
so there is a complete breakdown of
communication between
all the folks concerned about what is
happening the hospitals are getting
crowded
the doctors are and nurses and i should
say especially the nurses
don't have equipment to protect
themselves so they're cobbling together
whatever they can get
some hospitals have n95 masks some don't
they're cobbling together whatever they
can get and they're trying to move
forward but
really it's an emergency situation many
doctors are getting exposed
and as you know some people
are going to the icu because they don't
have
some patients are going to the icu
because they're beginning to develop
these
severe complications of covet so that is
where
sort of all of a sudden we are in the
middle of we're now in the mid
in mid pandemic and and people many
people
start obviously having having severe
problems
the second thing that happens at this
stage which is another mistake
is that some people get discharged from
the hospital
after being tested and they are asked to
return
to nursing homes where also they don't
have
ppe and nor do they actually have
any real equipment to protect the
workers
or protect residents from each other so
we have a situation in which
people are basically going back and
these nursing homes become petri dishes
because the virus then goes and infects
you know via nursing home workers
healthcare workers or through direct
contact people who are elderly and who
are the most vulnerable
and this cycle begins to repeat itself
so you go to the emergency room because
you feel
sick you aren't sick enough that they
would admit you to the emergency room
there is no quarantine in place there's
no isolation in place
there's no contact racing in place some
of those people are sent back to their
you know rehab facilities nursing homes
etc because they aren't sick enough to
be in the hospital because the hospital
beds are too full
and they go and they become new sort of
sources of infection
at the nursing homes themselves
meanwhile the government is saying
publicly don't wear masks uh you know we
have a federal system as you know which
is a
which is a problem and a pandemic we'll
come back to that in a second
the it's it's the governor's individual
decision about what to do whether to
isolate whether to quarantine whether to
close schools
new york ultimately closes schools in my
opinion
late too late two weeks too late perhaps
and then
by then it is it is too late in this
city at least
to do anything so from that moment
forward i mean i know new york became
its own
version of italy and so many things
happened
from the public perception side of this
that are just frankly bizarre i mean the
fact that we were sitting here watching
i guess it's understandable to hear that
there's a flu in wuhan and
who knows if it's going to get here but
you know once it's starting to get here
and once we see what's happening in
italy our
lassitude seems fairly inexplicable
from my point of view but even if you
could explain that
somehow psychologically this intuition
that never really had to be
stated that might be some law of nature
that would prevent this
thing from spreading to you know every
corner of the earth and
every inch of our society if we just sat
there and did nothing about it
once it hit new york and new york became
you know fairly similar to lombardy
you still saw a country that was
incredibly slow to respond with some
exceptions
california responded pretty quickly
but even the places that have responded
even you know even california
and went through a significant lockdown
it
still was a a fairly piecemeal effort
and you know all the while undermined by
our basic failure to get any of these
necessary ingredients of a response
to scale i mean testing tracing ppe
took a long time i don't even know if
ppe is in danger of running out now
how do you explain this general picture
of forget our initial missteps once we
understand the gravity of the problem
how do you explain our failure to get up
to speed and to perform
the way you'd expect the leading
technical and medical power on earth
to perform well there's several
explanations sam and you've identified
most of the problems right off the bat
one explanation is that in this federal
system or really in in a system where
governors have independent choices and
decisions to make and have
full authority or large authority unless
you have a system in which
under emergency a task force takes over
and tells people exactly what to do then
things begin to fall apart so what
happens
in in this particular situation is that
states
you know essentially have or use their
own
metrics their own decisions and they're
quite wildly different so california
and new york new york is in the mid
pandemic california reacts early
and many places impose lockdowns but in
general
these lockdowns are not really
severe or compliant so businesses are
locked down which of course causes
great economic loss but people are still
wandering the streets there
there is no systematic lockdown and
that's the opposite of what
what you want right so you want business
to businesses obviously to remain open
as long as you can and you want people
to stay in their homes and be tested and
be contact traced
but in many places we've seen in the
united states just the opposite happens
businesses have to comply for lots of
reasons including the fact that they're
you know they have to protect their
employees but people
are not compliant you remember in spain
and italy and many other countries
you know there was really a
quasi-military intervention
to prevent people from from entering the
streets you know if you went to the
streets
a police officer would come up to you or
a military officer would come up to you
and say
what are you doing and why are you out
of your house that was the state of
lockdown which is a real lockdown
a quasi lockdown is worse because it
hurts the businesses
and it doesn't prevent the spread in
people and unfortunately in many cases
there was a quasi lockdown
masking was not mandatory in new york we
quickly made masking mandatory and i'm
i suppose i i'm proud to say that's one
of the one of one of the things that
that i and others
pushed very early on saying that yes
we'll never have the final evidence
and maybe we won't get it in time but
from lots and lots of respiratory
viruses we know that social distancing
and
mask wearing does reduce viral load does
reduce viral transmission
especially if both the infected and the
infectee
or the naive if both of them wear it you
get a double effect and potentially
a synergistic effect so so what you have
in the united states is this kind of
bizarre crisis in which there is
you know what i what i would call a
quasi lockdown
with enough leak through that in fact as
soon as the lockdown is opened
in some places the virus starts
spreading again
now in new york the lockdown was very
strongly enforced
and to some extent we saw the worst of
things we saw the worst of the pandemic
a huge number of cases and a huge number
of deaths
but then once the lockdown was in place
there it was quite a lot of compliance
there's a high degree of compliance in
new york and new york state on masking
there's a high degree of compliance on
social distancing
and new york opened in faye is still
going through phases
but new york opened in phases and that's
important because
when you didn't open in phases what
we've seen in other places
when you went from lock down to complete
open
situation what happened is we've seen
that once again the curve of
of not just infected cases but deaths
has begun to rise again it's very
important here
these are lessons that we've learned
actually from cancer and from other
diseases
it's very important to count deaths
because deaths are not sensitive
to testing you know if you increase
testing you'll detect more people
right debts are not debts are not
sensitive to testing debts are an
absolute value
and i would urge anyone who's listening
or reading to this to
to you know you can just it's very easy
to google you can just google
us covet debts and you'll see exactly
the whole story laid out in front of you
you'll see the rise which is mostly in
new york
new jersey etc rise the lockdown
and then you'll see a second rise and
that is of course in states such as
arizona southern california especially
more than northern california
and other states texas except sid even
here
there's been room for doubt and
conspiracy theories right so there
even fairly prominent people have come
forward saying
that the death statistics are completely
false
because hospitals have been incentivized
to more or less presume or assert
covet as the cause of death even when
you know someone is you know
stage four pancreatic cancer and you
know had a you know a week to live
anyway
or they didn't even test them they had a
fever and that's compatible with a cova
diagnosis and you had you've had people
again you know you've had obvious
crackpots and
lunatics saying this but then you've had
extremely prominent people who
don't have any expertise here you know
people like elon musk you know out on
social media
saying these things so can you put
this particular concern to rest that our
fatality statistics
can't be remotely trusted yes yes i can
or partly can i can do it from two
angles one is
from our own hospital from the new york
experience i know
from people from from from from my
patients at least
no one no one that i know was
incorrectly
marked as dead from covid when they
actually were dying or dead from
something else
so that's anecdotal but more than
anecdotal actually we have numerical
evidence of this being true and that is
the fact that the
case fatality rate of for covid which is
the number of people who die upon
getting infected
has really hovered across the world
around 0.7 percent percent you know a
little bit higher a little bit lower
obviously it depends on age groups you
know so if you're in the
in the worst category of of the the most
susceptible category to death
it would rise to you know five six seven
this is these are elderly people
or having co-morbid conditions but if
you look overall
the the pattern of is you know the
numbers
you know end up being in the point seven
to point eight percent
range and when we were doing adequate
testing we have now slowed down in the
united states because now the test is
you can't get a test you know the test
turnaround time has now gone up again to
about
seven to eight days but when we were
doing adequate testing and appropriate
testing
the mortality rate was tracking that
number
point seven point eight point you know
one percent it wasn't tenfold higher one
for lower so
if you just use simple math it will tell
you
that the simple math would tell you that
that as long as the debts don't go a log
full let's say or tenfold
higher or lower than what has been seen
all around the world
then then the the debts are real
now of course these people have
pre-morbid conditions or co-morbid
conditions
and yes of course i mean some of them
may have indeed
have had other reasons to be susceptible
and to die and maybe they
had pre-morbid condition conditions that
were quite severe but
again pure mathematical reasoning will
tell you that
that it can't be even if there is a
conspiracy that it can't be such a large
conspiracy
to completely distort their destroyed
reality
am i making any sense did i am i making
sense yeah yeah no that makes sense
so how do you explain the fact that even
at this
late stage we seem to be losing ground
on testing
i mean again the picture is one of an
airstrial
medical and technical superpower
struggling to produce you know
everything down to
cotton swabs why are we not testing
and tracing like a supercharged
south korea at this point well that's
partly because we don't have all the
equipment
to do that and we didn't you know we
have
unfortunately and again i would refer
back to the piece i wrote in the new
yorker
there's a very there's a very important
interview there
of one of the people who makes n95 masks
as an example
and basically his business this is a guy
named mike bowen
his business of making n95 masks
couldn't survive
because he was constantly getting out
competed by
by the chinese and because of cost
cutting
and because of of efficiency in
hospitals
their business was unable to survive and
so we became
progressively dependent on other
countries including china in particular
to produce valuable reagents which are
important in in the medical process
so we have a situation in which all of a
sudden one reagent isn't
is for a test isn't available and the
whole test
testing system breaks down and that's
what we've seen
again so so one thing that has become
very clear
is that supercharged as you are you may
be supercharged on efficiency
but you are not in this case
supercharged on on resilience
and you need both you need to be
supercharged and efficiency
and that's great but when things are in
short supply you need to have stockpiles
which are not efficient you need to have
a backup system
which is not efficient you may need to
have again you may need to have
manufacturers local manufacturers not
behold into chinese
goods or to goods from any other country
i don't want to blame one country or
over another in this particular
situation
but not beholden to any particular
country in which you are
essentially so beholden to to some good
from that country
that you can that that if if that part
fails
you know you can no longer work and
that's been that's been the case
in our situation now how have you
perceived the role of public health
communication
here i mean i saw i'm thinking in
particular
about robert redfield who's heading the
cdc
and deborah burks who was heading the
task force
you know pence's task force on on corona
and i guess
you know anthony fauci as well these
have been the most
to my eye the most public medical voices
and to varying degrees i mean
most of their public statements have
seemed you know
fairly constrained and even you know
abject
attempts to simply avoid embarrassing
president trump that will walk in a line
which really in many cases can't
coherently be walked
you know around his misstatements in
their efforts to communicate
public health information and again to
varying degrees i mean i
would say fauci has escaped
comparatively
unscathed but i mean both burks and
redfield again
i i mean forgive me if these are friends
of yours and and i now seem to be
disparaging them but
they no they're i know fauci very i know
fauci very well i don't know deborah or
or dr brooks i should say and nor any of
the other folks
right in that this is now getting to be
a very old story where you have people
who have
real reputations and who have
accomplished a lot
in their lives right whether it's in
business or the military
or in this case medicine who i can only
assume
have reputations for integrity and
probity and
just a host of virtues that are worth
protecting
and they undergo this horrible
transformation
in proximity to trump i mean it's almost
a visible
diminishing of their integrity
just standing next to the man it's like
radiation poisoning
every second they spend standing too
close to the reactor core
you can see them withering and so i mean
for
burks and redfield this has been fairly
painful to watch when they're at the
podium trying to make sense
and say something responsible in the
wake of whatever
insane bloviation just came out of the
president
and fauci has had to navigate that same
space as well
and the result has been a pretty just
frankly ineffectual communication about
the public health imperatives of the
moment i mean that's just been you know
my experience
watching cnn whenever i happen to catch
these press conferences which happen
less and less
what has been your perception of this i
mean i think you know of the people
there i know tony fauci the best and
i've
worked with tony on various things
before i think that the
it's been it's been quite clear that
he's had
really a task that completely unenviable
task
he's had a task that that i i just don't
know how you could possibly navigate
given the situation and given the
problems that
have arisen so i think you're absolutely
right
[Music]
if you'd like to continue listening to
this podcast you'll need to subscribe at
samharas.org
you'll get access to all full-length
episodes of the making sense podcast
and to other subscriber-only content
including bonus episodes
and amas and the conversations i've been
having on the waking up app
the making sense podcast is ad-free and
relies entirely on listener support
and you can subscribe now at
samharas.org
you